# vim: set ft=_txt tw=0 cc=:

      Experientia



      The Cold Reading Technique

      Experientia 44 (1988): 326-32

      Denis Dutton

                                                           www.denisdutton.com



              The Barnum Effect

              That there is a sucker born every minute is the cynical slogan
              most often attributed to the great nineteenth-century circus
              entreprenuer Phineas Taylor Barnum. Though there is in fact no
              record that he ever made such a remark, Barnum did claim that
              his success depended on providing in his shows  a little
              something for everybody. Both the cynicism and his recipe for
              success are relevant to understanding the persistent tendency
              for people to embrace fake personality descriptions as uniquely
              their own. This in turn gives a particular aptness to Paul Meehl
               s phrase, the Barnum Effect, to describe the phenomenon.^19

              Modern interest in the Barnum Effect among psychologists dates
              from Forer s classic experiment in which a group of 39
              undergraduate psychology students were given the Diagnostic
              Interest Blank.^7 A week later every student was provided with
              the same personality description, but was led to believe that
              each description was uniquely different, having been derived
              from the test results. The students were then asked to rate the
              accuracy of their  individual personality descriptions on a
              scale of 0 (poor) to 5 (perfect). Of the 39 students, only 5
              rated it below 4, and no one rated it below 2 (average). The
              average rating was 4.3.

              Forer s initial concern was with personality theory and
              assessment,^8 and the relevance of this effect to understanding
               psychic and apparently paranormal effects was not to begin with
              widely recognized. As late as l962, P.A. Marks and W. Seeman
              were calling for the term  Barnum Effect to be restricted to
              test-derived clinical personality descriptions of patients which
              are so general (and trivial) that they apply to everybody.^18
              But the fact that Forer had obtained his generalized personality
              description not from standard texts in personality theory but
              from a newsstand astrology book indicated that the Barnum Effect
              might be significant in contexts far beyond the clinical.

              Forer s original personality description is perfectly servicable
              even today. It was presented as numbered sentences; here it is
              as a continuous paragraph:

              You have a great need for other people to like and admire you.
              You have a tendency to be critical of yourself. You have a great
              deal of unused capacity which you have not turned to your
              advantage. While you have some personality weaknesses, you are
              generally able to compensate for them. Your sexual adjustment
              has presented some problems for you. Disciplined and
              self-controlled outside, you tend to be worrisome and insecure
              inside. At times you have serious doubts as to whether you have
              made the right decision or done the right thing. You prefer a
              certain amount of change and variety and become dissatisfied
              when hemmed in by restrictions and limitations. You pride
              yourself as an independent thinker and do not accept others
              statements without satisfactory proof. You have found it unwise
              to be too frank in revealing yourself to others. At times you
              are extroverted, affable, sociable, while at other times you are
              introverted, wary, reserved. Some of your aspirations tend to be
              pretty unrealistic. Security is one of your major goals in life.

              Parts of Forer s phraseology   sexual adjustment  might be
              effectively put in more contemporary language, and there are
              current preoccupations which could be used to make the
              description even more immediately appealing to contemporary
              readers. But this is a description designed to be given to young
              people of both sexes, and it is remarkable how well it wears
              after almost forty years. Slight variations on the orginal Forer
              description have been used in numerous studies in the l950s,
              60s, and 70s, all in one form or another replicating the
              remarkable susceptibility of subjects to the Barnum Effect.^
              3,4,6,14

              There has been less agreement, however, on exactly why the
              Barnum Effect works as well as it does. The most charitable
              interpretation would be to say that Barnum descriptions are
              simply true of most people: that in endorsing the applicability
              of Barnum descriptions subjects simply recognize facts.^7 But
              this account of the situation hardly captures the point of
              essential interest in Barnum descriptions. If the consistent
              endorsement by subjects of Barnum descriptions were merely a
              matter of recognizing their nearly universal applicability,
              subjects would not then be so prone to treat such descriptions
              as uniquely describing their own idiosyncrasies. Subjects, from
              Forer s original experiment to the present time, would then
              presumably be more willing to term such descriptions  average in
              applying to their own personalities. Nor would subjects be
              typically so eager to praise Barnum descriptions in the ways
              quoted by Ulrich et al.:  On the nose! Very good. I wish you had
              said more.  Applies to me individually, as there are too many
              facets which fit me too well to be a generalization.
              Surprisingly accurate and specific in description. ^30

              There are two major aspects of Barnum descriptions which affect
              the the degree of acceptance by subjects. The first is the
              perceived source of the description, and the second is its
              actual content. With respect to the question of source, the
              research of C.R. Snyder and various colleagues has been among
              the most significant since the original Forer experiment.^23,24
              Snyder and Larson found that subjects were more inclined to
              accept Barnum descriptions of themselves if such descriptions
              are presented as derived uniquely for them, rather than just
              given as a general description said to be true for most people.^
              9 This crucial function played by the illusion of uniqueness in
              the acceptance of Barnum descriptions was decisively
              demonstrated in a later experiment conducted by Snyder and
              Shenkel.^27,28

              Snyder and Shenkel had bogus student  astrologers prepare
              horoscopes, which were actually uniform Barnum descriptions, for
              a group of subjects. The horoscopes were to be rated by the
              subjects on a 5 point scale: 1, very poor; 2, poor; 3, average;
              4, good; 5, excellent. Some of the subjects gave the  astrologer
               no birth information at all, members of a second group were
              required to provide their month of birth, while a third group
              gave the exact year, month, and day of birth. When asked how
              closely the horoscope resembled their own personalities, the
              three groups of students differed significantly. Those who had
              given no birth information averaged an approval rating of 3.24.
              Those who had given only the month of birth found the Barnum
              description on average to rate 3.76, while for those who had
              revealed their exact date of birth, the approval average shot up
              to 4.38.

              Another experiment which revealed the importance of the
              perceived source of the description was carried out by
              Silverman.^22 He presented subjects who possessed a minimal
              familiarity with astrology with twelve sun-sign personality
              descriptions. They were asked to choose the four that best
              suited themselves. When the personality descriptions were
              presented merely numbered, subjects had no tendency to choose
              the one derived from their own sun sign more often than chance
              would dictate. But when the descriptions were correctly labelled
              according to the astrological sign, there was a marked tendency
              for subjects to choose their own sign.

              While these experiments show quite conclusively that a Barnum
              description is more striking when it is believed to be derived
              from a credible source, they also indicate that people are often
              likely to be impressed by Barnum descriptions which involve some
              sort of arcane  mumbo-jumbo. ^11,12,16,21 In other words, while
              a Barnum description may gain in believability when it is
              thought to be derived from a  credible source, such as a
              professional psychologist, it may have even more charm for a
              subject if it is thought to be derived from a mystical or
              incredible source, such as the lines on the palm of the hand, or
              the order of cards from a Tarot deck. Much depends here on the
              prior beliefs and predispositions the subject brings to his or
              her encounter with the description.

              There is another aspect to the question of source. One of Snyder
               s studies showed that projective tests produced greater belief
              in a Barnum description than either interview by a psychologist
              or (with the lowest belief rating of all) objective tests.^26
              The reason given by Snyder for the differential is that
              projective tests, and to a lesser degree diagnostic interviews,
              are surrounded by an air of  mystery. But there is a further
              point at stake: a projective test would seem to the subject to
              involve a more creative manifestation of self than ticking off
              letters on a multiple-choice objective test. In a projective
              test, I create my own  unique interpretations of, say, an
              inkblot. Though from a professional viewpoint the results of any
              projective test may be utterly conventional and typical for a
              group of subjects, to the naive subject the test will very
              likely be thought of as something which yields a unique product
              of his or her creative personality. This, compounded by the fact
              that the interpretation of the projective test is presumably a
              subtle and mysterious process, leaves the subject in most cases
              more than willing to validate the result, if it is to his or her
              liking.

              This brings us to the second major factor in determining the
              acceptability of a Barnum description: its content. Naturally,
              people are eager for praise, and the more flattering the
              description, the more likely it is to succeed. This has long
              been recognized by paranormal practitioners  few astrologers
              would say to a client, for example,  Let s face it, as a Libra,
              you re undersexed and you lie a lot. Yet so-called negative
              information can have an important place in the overall
              functioning of the Barnum Effect. This is, however, a very
              difficult matter to deal with quantitatively, and the
              psychologists studies which have hitherto be undertaken are not
              especially helpful in understanding it. Dmitruk et al. came to
              the general conclusion that subjects were nearly equally as
              likely to accept negative as positive Barnum descriptions of
              themselves.^5 Yet the negative Barnum description employed in
              the Dmitruk et al. experiment tends merely to stress the
              insecurity of the subject; it is not  negative in the stronger
              sense, say, that it describes the subject as morally worthless
              or as an individual personally disagreeable to others. Other
              later investigators have concluded that subjects are indeed more
              inclined to accept positive than negative Barnum statements
              about themselves.^1,10,31 But in considering this point, one is
              faced with subtle questions of connotations of terms and context
              of usage. It is crucially important to understand exactly what
              negative words form part of a Barnum description, and exactly
              how they are used in the general context of the descriptions in
              order to evaluate any particular study.

              The original Forer description was not unqualifiedly flattering
              in content, and in fact reason would suggest that pure flattery
              would not necessarily be the best way to enhance the appeal of a
              Barnum description. It is not simply a matter of undesirable
              descriptions being tolerated if they are presented in a
              generally flattering context: they can even add to the
              credibility of a Barnum description, by giving it a greater
              sense of realism than mere flattery could have. Subjects in
              general are not unwilling to admit that they have problems and
              faults; the most successful Barnum description is often one
              which allows this, but does so in the context of generally
              telling the subject that in the final analysis he or she is
              really a splendid person. Though this is a point of dispute
              among professional psychologists, it is well recognized in
              practice by paranormal  professionals who make use of the Barnum
              Effect in pedaling their horoscopes and psychic readings.

              But even where there are negative or undesirable elements in a
              Barnum description, subjects have in any event a strong tendency
              to notice and remember only a percentage of available items.
              This is selectivity of attention. Given the considerable number
              of elements in any Barnum description, there will be a wide
              latitude of response and agreement from any individual
              accompanied by a marked inclination to notice items that seem to
              fit more than items that seem inappropriate. Confirmations are
              remembered, often quite vividly, whereas less plausible aspects
              of the description are paid correspondingly less attention.^16
              And since the point of a Barnum description is that it be
              general enough to apply to almost anyone, the subject will be
              hard pressed to identify any item in the description which is
              plainly wrong. Selectivity of attention also means that where a
              group of subjects receives the same Barnum description, it will
              be read differently by everyone, each subject concentrating
              attention on those aspects of the description which seem best to
              fit a prior self-image.

              Moreover, the Barnum description is supposed to  fit a human
              personality, and it should not surprise that something as
              uncertain and amorphous, yet exceedingly complex, as the human
              personality should be subject to a large number of nearly
              equally plausible descriptions.^9 Young people in particular
              the most frequent subjects of psychologists studies of the
              Barnum Effect  often have a  soft or nebulous sense of the
              qualities of self which they share with others or which
              distinguish them as individuals. Hence, they easily succumb to
              the charms of a well devised Barnum description. And the
              uncertainty felt by many people, young or old, about their own
              personalities also explains the possibly self-fulfilling
              character of such Barnum phenomena as horoscopes.^2 An
              impressionable person with an immature sense of self may be
              quickly suckered by a vivid and flattering description of, say,
              the Aquarian personality as  humanitarian, independant,
              friendly, willing, a progressive outlook, original, inventive, a
              reforming spirit, faithful, loyal, idealistic, intellectually
              inclined. Indeed, such a description can be influential in
              building the person s self-image, encouraging, for example,
              loyalty or intellectual pursuits.

              Cold Reading

              Cold Reading is the term of art used in the magician s trade to
              describe the practical use of the Barnum Effect in the
              give-and-take of an interview situation. Though interest in the
              technique by professional psychologists dates from the late
              l940s, it has long been put to profitable use by
              fortune-tellers, clairvoyants, tarot card readers, astrologers,
              tea leaf readers, spirit mediums, and others who wish to convey
              the impression that they possess paranormal insight into the
              client s personality, current life situation, and future. But it
              would be a mistake to imagine that cold reading has in all cases
              been carried out naively, without any theoretical insight. Some
              paranormal practitioners understand full well the nature and
              character of the cold reading technique, and indeed the very
              best work on this subject produced by professional psychologists
              has been carried out by scholars such as Marks^16 and Hyman^
              11,12 who have an independent interest in conjuring. One
              professional magician who has written eloquently of cold reading
              is William W. Larsen, Sr.^13 Larsen never claimed in his
              writings  published privately in the l930s and 1940s and
              distributed only for use by professional conjurers  that he
              possessed any paranormal abilities. What he did possess was a
              superb skill in leaving an individual or audience with the
              illusion that he had such abilities.

              His standard cold reading description is his so-called Life Span
              Reading, which can be used  straight or with a crystal ball, or
              can be  given while seemingly reading the subject s palm, laying
              out the cards, toying with numbers, or gazing at tea leaves in a
              cup. It is a one-size-fits-all reading which can be delivered to
               any adult person of either sex. As Larsen puts it, it is  based
              upon events which occur in the vast majority of human lives yet,
              adroitly stated, the reading will become personalized and the
              person receiving the reading will be willing to believe that the
              seer has correctly told the past and probably foreseen the
              future. Every word is the purest Barnum: a clever account of the
              subject s life and personality up to the present time in terms
              of six  life cycles of vague length (some last  but a few days,
              while others  may endure for years ). There was in childhood a
              close brush with death  by you or someone close to you. There
              were trials and many changes, the loss of someone close, and an
              illness or  bad accident. Along with the predictable Barnum
              personality attributes (including, on the negative side,  a note
              of stubborness ), there are forecasts of finanacial gain,
              perhaps having to do with real estate or  property changing
              hands.

              A nightclub act which Larsen describes also relies on the Barnum
              Effect in an amusing manner. The  psychic stands blindfolded on
              the stage, while his assistant  he recommends  an attractive
              girl  goes among members of the audience, holding her hands over
              individuals. She says,  I have here a young lady, a  very nice
              man, or some such, and the magician proceeds to deliver,
              presumably from some deep, mystic source, significant personal
              messages to the designated audience members. He tells a woman
              that she is making a mistake right now trying to reason her way
              to a decision  she should rely on her intuition and hunches:  If
              you do, the right course will always be presented to you, and
              that includes the little problem that s puzzling you right now.
              For a young man, he hears the ringing of a bell  or is it a ring
               such as might be worn on the finger? I leave the answer to you.
               For another woman, Larsen sees  blue sky  or blue water?... And
              somewhere, far in the distance, I hear a voice calling, “Yes, I
              am here.” I see for you good fortune.

              Many in the audience find the messages highly meaningful, proof
              that some sort of paranormal powers are being employed. Yet the
              statements are memorized spiel, delivered according to a code
              from the assistant to identify the sex and age of each subject:
               a young lady means a female 20-30 years old,  a lady means
              30-55, and  a very nice lady means 55 and over, and similarly
              with men. From these six crude categories, the appropriate cold
              reading of up to 150 words is delivered. The emphasis is
              frequently the same in similar categories, though no two
              readings are exactly alike: for young women there is often
              mention of romance and travel, for young men, success with
              ambitions. For  ladies, perhaps an important letter that was
              recently received (to which attention must be paid) or there may
              be artistic talents that have not been utilized. For middle-aged
              men, the stress is on making money, while for  very nice ladies
              happiness and family ties. The blindfold, as it turns out, is no
              impediment at all. Larsen explains to his magician readers that
              the procedure works so well because the cold reading  you will
              give is the one that will pretty generally fit any person of
              that sex and age group. Only occasionally will you miss entirely
              and even then you will be a miracle man to the majority. For
              example, in a room of 50 people you read for one and happen to
              hit, you are 100% a mental genius. But, should you wholly fail,
              you are still a psychic wonder to 49 other people. However, he
              continues, you will find that you will not miss often:  The
              average person will accept anything you tell him or her, and
              apply it personally. In other words, they ll make your reading
              fit themselves. As a psychic, people want to believe you.

              In the cool pages of a scholarly journal it is easy to forget
              just how effective a good magician can be in proving to an
              audience his  psychic powers. As Larsen is quick to insist, this
              has even less to do with the consummate skill of the performer
              than with the eagerness of most subjects to hear themselves
              insightfully described by a superior or mystic authority. Allied
              to this is the creative web of imagination itself, which weaves
              a bogus relevance for the cold reading, so that in the end it
              seems certain that it was meant especially for us. In this
              sense, a condition for gullibility is often a profound and
              overweening interest in the self. Astrology, to cite but one
              example, is frequently cast in the role of an outmoded
              competitor to modern astronomy. This is a misunderstanding of
              the function that astrology plays in people s lives. Astronomy
              is about planets, stars, and galaxies; astrology, however, is
              about me, and the special place I have in the grand cosmic
              scheme. It explains my unique personality, my special hopes and
              desires. From astronomy I learn that I am but an insignificant
              creature in some minor corner of the universe; astrology tells
              me I am someone unique and important. In this respect, astrology
              does not function as an alternative to scientific astronomy, but
              as a rival to the personal support provided by religion.

              It is regrettable that academic psychology has not paid more
              attention to the cold reading technique, inasmuch as the
              widespread practice of successful cold reading forms the basis
              for much of the belief in paranormal powers to be found in
              society today. With rare exceptions  such as the research of
              Hyman, Marks and Kammann, and Tyson  explorations by academic
              psychologists in this area have been limited almost exclusively
              to aspects of the Barnum effect, investigated via tests
              administered to the usual classes of undergraduates. In my view,
              what is needed now is analysis of the actual techniques and
              methods used by proficient cold readers.^20,29

              This interaction is, however, an extremely complex one. A cold
              reading conventionally begins with Barnum statements appropriate
              to the client in question. These may involve personality
              assessments, but might well be a description of the client s
              situation:  You ve been going through a period of change [or
              uncertainty, difficult decisions, personal dilemmas, etc.]
              lately, haven t you? As the client is already listening to the
              cold reader with a set of expectations, these will color his
              interpretation of the initial remarks. The client s response,
              which will include overt verbal information as well as subtle
              facial expressions, will in turn modify the development of the
              reading. The reader can be expected to exploit and elaborate on
              obvious  hits, while downplaying or reinterpreting  misses.
              Understanding the nuances of this interplay calls for skills
              more like those employed in the analysis of a literary text than
              those used in a statistical account of multiple-choice
              responses. It also requires unhindered access to a cold reader.
              In this respect, I was given a rare opportunity to  overhear a
              long series of cold readings given by a practicing spirit medium
              on radio.

              A spirit medium in action

              For two years, a national radio network employed the services of
              a spirit medium on nighttime talk-back radio. Listeners were
              encouraged to telephone during the program in order to obtain
              advice and messages from deceased relatives and friends. With
              interruptions for news broadcasts and commercial advertisements,
              the spirit medium, whom we shall call  Betty, was able to deal
              with between eight and fourteen callers in an hour s period.
              Here was a situation to hear a professional cold reader in
              action over an extended period of time and under remarkably
              controlled conditions. The control consisted in the fact that,
              unlike face-to-face psychic reading situations, there were no
              visual cues or clues which Betty could pick up on. All of the
              information she had available about callers was equally
              accessible to any listener. Although it would have been possible
              for accomplices to call Betty, and for her on such occasions to
              display  astounding paranormal cognitive or clairvoyant
              abilities, I do not believe her readings ever involved such
              deception. I incline to this belief because in the months that I
              studied her Betty never once seemed to have information about
              any caller, or the deceased relatives of any caller, which was
              not perfectly consistent with viewing her performances as
              unaided cold reading.

              Moreover, as a virtuoso cold reader she had little need for such
              subterfuge. A dazzling technician of her profession, the
              grandmotherly Betty was able simply on the basis of publicly
              broadcast telephone conversations to convince many callers and
              listeners alike that she could communicate with the dead.
              However, as with a pianist gifted at improvization, her readings
              were constructed from from a large, but not unlimited, set of
              elements, or  bag of tricks. In listening to her, it was
              possible in the first hour or two to be very much impressed by
              her skills. Progressively, however, one began to notice
              repetition. The readings were all different, but more and more
              began to resemble one another, especially when they were
              readings directed at the same sort of caller. The use of a tape
              recorder greatly facilitated the analysis of her patterns of
              response. As a reader with many years of wide experience, it was
              possible for Betty to catch subtle clues to a caller s situation
              and concerns much more quickly that most listeners. Again, the
              tape recorder was very helpful in understanding this. A typical
              reading, in this actual case from a caller named Maureen, might
              proceed as follows:

               Good evening, Betty.

               Good evening, Maureen.

               Do you hear anything from my Mum?

              [Though Maureen has spoken but ten words, Betty  or any listener
               can already surmise that she is upwards of 55 years old, might
              have been raised in Ireland, and is a generally jovial person or
              at least tonight is in a happy mood. As distinct from other
              categories of caller, she does not sound recently bereaved, or
              as though she is seeking advice on a personal problem.]

               Yes, I can, [Betty gushes.] because I have the most smiling
              lady here beside me! You know, Maureen, she used to put her
              hands together in glee, didn t she?

               Yes. [A note of hesitation.]

               And she almost jumped up and down!

               That s right [With more confidence.]

               That s what she's doing at the moment! [Betty s voice reaches a
              peak of excitement, and then becomes more serious.] Now, just as
              I was saying that, she was giving me a feeling  in the abdomen,
              not in the stomache  and it s all tight. It feels emaciated but
              blown up. And she's having trouble breathing  it must have been
              that way at the end

               That s right. [Betty s spirits usually identify themselves by
              recounting their deathbed symptoms: vague complaints in the
              thorax region, difficulties in breathing, weakness, and
              occasionally head pains. Auto accident victims tell of  chest
              pains. ]

               Yes, yes, I was overseas when she died at home. [It is now
              clearer that Maureen is Irish and closer perhaps to 65 or 70
              years old.]

               Gosh, there is a crowd of people around her!

               Is there? [Maureen is astonished.] Is Mum s sister with her?

               Yes, exactly. [Betty replies with casual confidence.]

               And my father? [Maureen almost shouts with excitement.]

               Yes, he s there too.

               And is my brother there? [The eager client supplies the reader
              with all the material required.]

               Yes, your brother is there too. And look [Betty s voice is
              almost embarrassed.], I know this sounds funny, but there are
              five grandparents here! [Betty often suggests a family friend,
              aunt, or uncle who was important in childhood.]

               Oh...[Maureen hesitates.] Oh! That could be my Mum s English
              friend!

               And going back to that time, can we talk about a donkey cart?

               Oh, yes! [A donkey cart would be a memorable feature for almost
              any person of Maureen's age and Irish childhood. Such a
              reference exemplifies Betty s broad knowledge of ethnic
              associations and general population stereotypes; but note the
              caution  not  your family s cart, but just  a donkey cart. It is
              left to Maureen to remember which particular cart Betty must
              mean. ]

               And the times that were associated with it  you can really feel
              the pleasure of that time.

               That's right. [Maureen is emphatic.]

               Now look  I m being shown a row of houses, and they re
              apartment houses.

               Yes... [Maureen hesitates.]

               And there are about four of them...

              [Silence from Maureen, indicating puzzlement.]

               Now bear with me here  and I ve got a sort of red brick.

              [Longer silence  it must come as a surprise that an elderly
              Irish lady cannot relate some memory to a description of common
              brick row houses, but even the best utilized population
              stereotypes will occasionally fail.]

               Now, Maureen, this isn t where you lived! [Betty speaks firmly
              .]

               No...no, it s not. [Of course it isn t; but an awkward miss is
              being cleverly converted to a hit.]

               But it s where...ah...[Betty is groping.]...ah...a dear friend
              lived! Can you understand that?

               Yes. [Maureen speaks without conviction: she is trying to
              figure who the friend might be. Betty quickly changes the
              subject.]

               Also, I m being handed a little posy of flowers. They re almost
              like forget-me-nots, but I m not sure that they are  and she s
              handing those to you.

               My mother is?

               Yes, it is your mother.

               Oh, how nice!

               And you know, Maureen, there s an anniversary coming up soon  a
              time of memory. It was somebody s birthday. [With Maureen s many
              relatives, somebody, living or dead, must have a birthday soon.]

               Oh, yes...

               And that one sends their love to you too. [The ungrammatical
              their doubles the possibilities of either  his or  her, but this
              hardly seems necessary, as by now it clear that Maureen will
              accept anything that Betty says, making, as Larsen so aptly put
              it, the reading fit herself.]

               And my brother [Maureen s voice takes on a melancholy tone.],
              is he happy?

               He s happy now, he s telling me, and he s stressing the word
              now. He says, “She ll know  you don t have to ask me more  she
              ll know.

               Oh, I know...I know. [Maureen sighs.]

               I m having trouble keeping up with all of them here  they re
              all crowding in  and they re all happy.

               Here s one  a prickly one. Is my mother-in-law about?

               Yes, she is.

               Is she happy?

               Yes, she is. She was a little bit of a discontented lady, she
              tells me. [To the contrary, it was Maureen who told her that
              with the  prickly characterization.]

               Yes! [Amazed.] That s right!

               But she says,  Well, you ve got to learn contentment, and there
               s no reason we can t have contentment here, because we have
              everything we need.

               Isn t that marvelous! ....



              Marvelous indeed, as the spirit medium proceeds to pass on
              further messages from relatives, until the professional radio
              announcer/host calls the reading to a close to move on to a
              musical advertisement for, appropriately, cold lunch meats.

              Every cold reader will have a personal style. Betty s ghosts,
              besides identifying themselves with gruesome details of their
              last hours, are given to conveying visual images from the past.
              Invoking that great emblem of the middle class, Betty says,  I m
              being shown a manicured lawn  somebody must have kept that lawn
              as though it was trimmed with scissors, and the caller gasps in
              recognition. Deceased ladies are prone reveal themselves,
              sleeves rolled up, working in the kitchen. They also have a
              pronounced tendency to use their precious moments with Betty in
              order to give out a wide variety of baking tips:  She s telling
              me that you have to soak the fruit before it s baked these days,
              Louise. Sometimes ordinary cold reading remarks are transformed
              into weighty symbols:  Dad was interested in sports, wasn t he,
              Owen? Yes, he s showing me a set of starting blocks, and he s
              saying he had many false starts in life.

              In all of this, Betty shows a mastery of indirection. The
              vagueness of many of her descriptions might be thought of as a
              liability; more often it is a marked asset, allowing the client
              to  discover a meaning or connection for himself. Good teachers
              everywhere know that it is more effective to set up a situation
              where students think through to a correct answer for themselves,
              than simply to hand out information. Similarly, good cold
              readers know that the trick to appear as though they are
              providing definite information, and yet provide only
              strategically vague suggestions which can be imaginatively
              interpreted by the client according to his or her idiosyncratic
              situation: the cold reader supplies the hints, letting the
              client do all the actual work. For example, Betty will typically
              tell a young woman nothing more than that she  is being shown a
              good-sized open suitcase. If the caller has traveled anywhere
              recently, or is planning to go somewhere, or is even just
              thinking about the prospect, Betty will have scored a hit, and
              the caller can be expected delightedly to report to friends the
              next day,  She somehow knew I had just come back from overseas!
              (Such embroidery by satisfied clients is an inevitable feature
              of personal re-tellings of cold readings.) On one occasion when
              not even any of these possibilties seemed to fit, Betty
              explained to the puzzled caller that the suitcase meant that her
              mother thought she ought to take a trip.

              Betty manages throughout always to observe Hyman's celebrated
              rules for successful cold reading: she seems invariably to know
              more than she actually says, is ever modest about her abilities,
              and puts to effective use a thorough knowledge of population
              stereotypes. She is not adverse to asking a caller straight out
              for personal information, but seldom has to because of her acute
              listening abilities. She exudes great self-confidence and is
              always willing to flatter her client, or the client s relatives.
              (Once, for an apparently well-educated woman caller, she raised
              the spirit of the lady s late uncle. Not implausibly, Betty saw
              him engaged in research in a study surrounded by hundreds of
              books. The caller was suspicious of this flattering picture.
              That s strange, she said,  He certainly wasn t a learned man.
              Well, there you are, Luv, Betty responded,  he s making up for
              it now. )

              Above all, Betty follows Hyman s  golden rule : she tells
              clients what they want to hear. The dead are quite happy and
              contented on the  other side, feeling pain no longer, and
              enjoying the companionship of other deceased friends and
              relatives. This much is relatively innocuous: though one may
              disapprove in any practice which promotes superstition and false
              belief, at the same time it must be recognized that Betty was
              capable of providing real succor for the bereaved. More
              disturbing, however, was the advice which she was also prone to
              deliver: Peggy is told by her grandmother not to compromise her
              plans, Cynthia is warned that she might not be getting the right
              legal advice, and Robert s father wants to know,  Why are you
              hesitating?  it s time to act, he says! Fiona should go ahead
              with her plans for a career change, Pam's Mum is asking her not
              to change her mind, and Jill should be drinking an extract from
              the flax bush, or at least that s what Dad says. As for the
              elderly Margaret, her late husband tells her to stop  stuffing
              herself with those  artificial pills, and instead take a
              natural cure. While her physician might be appalled, it is quite
              possible that Margaret will more gladly follow her husband s
              advice. And herein lay the most troubling problem with Betty s
              cold reading performances: it is not that Betty herself offered
              advice, but that she claimed to convey advice from callers dead
              relatives. Many callers to Betty s program were merely curious,
              but there was a persistent minority of callers desperately in
              need of help with deep personal difficulties. These people were
              never allowed to discuss the actual particulars of their
              problems on the air; they were merely to accept that the
              guidance given was from their loved ones. To many of these
              people, Betty s words  which were, after all,  Dad s or  Nana s
              or  Mom s words  had a power and authority perhaps greater than
              that of anyone else. This may be part of the reason why, despite
              excellent listener ratings, she was finally taken off the air.

              Though Betty s broadcast performances provided relatively
              spectacular illustrations of the cold reading process in action,
              they were not in essential substance different from more modest
              forms of cold reading. Communication with the dead may have been
              the ostensible point, but her practice still involved the
              complex of an eager and perhaps troubled client, predisposed to
              belief; initial  Barnum guesses derived from population
              stereotypes; and elaboration and development of the reading
              based on hits and misses indicated by client s reactions. In
              other cold reading practices only the gimmick changes  a tarot
              deck, the lines of the palm, a crystal ball, and so forth.

              And many cold reading gimmicks will be subject to the whims of
              fashion: tea leaves and crystal balls are out of favor at
              present, while  aura reading has become very popular. Astrology
              can always be expected to maintain currency because it is so
              complicated to the uninitiated and seems to relate the
              individual to vast cosmic forces. Palmistry similarly will have
              continued appeal because the intimacy of personal contact
              involved in the reading. Beyond these standbys, we can expect to
              see new techniques promoted as  breakthroughs, mimicking, as
              paranormal claims so often do, the appearance and jargon of
              legitimate scientific disciplines. The only constant element
              will be the patterns of interplay between reader and client
              described here.

              A suggestion for future research

              One issue which inevitably arises in connection with cold
              reading is the question of sincerity. It is certainly the case
              that many cold readers cynically exploit their clients with
              self-consciously fraudulent intent. Yet there may be many more
              who actually believe their cold reading techniques are based in
              a scientifically valid process and achieve objectively
              beneficial results for the client. A large number of paranormal
              practitioners who make use of cold reading did not begin their
              activities with the intention of fooling or exploiting anyone.
              An excellent example is provided by the case of a much-respected
              professional scientist who is now a member of the New Zealand
              Committee for the Scientific Investigation of Claims of the
              Paranormal. As a postgraduate student in pursuit of a scientific
              career, he became intrigued with astrology. Though during this
              period he had nagging doubts about the physical basis of
              astrology, he was encouraged to continue with it by his many
              satisfied clients, who invariably found his readings  amazingly
              accurate in describing their personal situations and problems.
              Not until he had one day obtained such a gratifying reaction to
              a horoscope which, he realized later, he had cast completely
              incorrectly, did he begin slowly to understand the real nature
              of his activity: his great success as an astrologer had nothing
              whatsoever to do with the validity of astrology as a science. He
              had become, in fact, a proficient cold reader, one who sincerely
              believed in the power of astrology under the constant
              reinforcement of his clients. He was fooling them, of course,
              but only after falling for the illusion himself.

              While such changes of mind by a cold reader about the true
              nature of some parascience are possible (and Hyman tells a
              similar tale about his own youthful flirtation with palmistry),
              they are probably very rare. Most cold readers could not be
              expected to possess the personal honesty, critical
              sensibilities, or academic training of our erstwhile astrologer.
              Most important, however, is the influence of clients in
              validating the activities of the cold reader. Few cold readers
              can resist the praise they receive from their customers. When a
              method  Tarot reading, palm reading, astrology, etc.  seems so
              effectively to work for the client, it is difficult for the
              reader not to come equally to believe in the  gimmick itself,
              without knowing just why it succeeds so well. (After all, a cold
              reader might argue, medical doctors prescribe drugs without
              knowing the specific biochemistry of why they work.)

              There is a further aspect of cold reading which might in some
              instances contribute to its ingenuous practice. As Marks has
              suggested, anywhere between 1% and 5% of the population
              regularly experience  eidetic or hallucinatory images in an
              uncontrolled manner.^15 Not only might eidetic imagery explain
              much apparently paranormal phenomena, for example out-of-body
              experiences or the seeing of ghosts; it also might explain how,
              for instance, an aura reader could with all sincerity  see a
              brightly colored aura around a client and find in it the
              personality and problems of the client.^17 Whether eidetic
              imagery phenomena could be extended to impute sincerity to some
              spirit mediums is an open and controversial question, but it is
              certainly one which for some individual cases needs
              consideration. In general, there has perhaps been too great a
              tendency for skeptical investigators to impute fraudulent
              motives to cold readers. Without doubt, such an attitude is in
              many instances justified, but there are other situations where a
              complex dynamic of self-delusion is perpetuated by an
              uncontrolled imagination combined with the very process of cold
              reading itself. How this dynamic is established and supported
              clearly needs further systematic investigation.

              A final note: this discussion has presented cold reading as it
              flourishes in the domain of the paranormal. Yet it must be
              allowed that almost all professionals who use counselling in
              their work depend on practices which are in some respects near
              or distant relatives of cold reading. Thus cold reading extends
              beyond astrology and fortune telling through fringe medicine and
              into psychotherapy and even legitimate physical medicine. The
              psychiatrist, for example, who is faced with a patient
              displaying vague psychological symptoms may, in ways not wholly
              alien to the astrologer, present an  explanation of the disorder
              in terms of an impressive theory. The authority of the
              psychiatrist may persuade the patient that the correct
              explanation for his disorder has been found; indeed, he or she
              may eagerly embrace the psychiatrist s diagnostic narrative as
              amazingly accurate. Psychiatrists have many satisfied clients in
              situations where both doctor and patient firmly believe that it
              is the empirical content of the scientific theory according to
              which they were treated which has given benefit  when in fact
              any of a number of alternative theories might have worked as
              well. Thus the line that divides effective legitimate
              counselling from delusive cold reading may be less clear than
              some might wish to believe.

                                         University of Canterbury, New Zealand

                  Ackowledgements: I am grateful for assistance given me in
                  aspects of this research by George Balani, Josh Easby, B.H.
                  Howard, David Marks, and Patrick Sweeney.



                  References

                  1. Dana, R.H. and Fouke, H.P., Barnum statements in reports
                  of psychological assessment. Psych. Reports 44 (1979)
                  1215-1221.

                  2. Delaney, J.G. and Woodyard, H.D., Effects of reading an
                  astrological description on responding to a personality
                  inventory. Psych. Reports 34 (1974) 1214.

                  3. Dickson, D.H. and Kelly, I.W., The “Barnum Effect” in
                  personality assessment: a review of the literature. Psych.
                  Reports. 57 (1985) 367-382.

                  4. Dies, R.R., Personal gullibility or pseudodiagnosis: a
                  further test of the “fallacy of personal validation.” J.
                  Clin. Psych. 28 (1972) 47-50.

                  5. Dmitruk, V.M., Collins, R.W., and Clinger, D.L., The
                  “Barnum Effect” and acceptance of negative personal
                  evaluation. J. Consult. Clin. Psych. 41 (1973) 192-194.

                  6. Fichten, C.S. and Sunerton, B., Popular horoscopes and
                  the “Barnum Effect.” J. Psych. 114 (1983) 123-134.

                  7. Forer, B.R., The fallacy of personal validation: a
                  classroom study of gullibility. J. Abnorm. Soc. Psych. 44
                  (1949) 118-123.

                  8. Forer, B.R., Personal validation and the person. Psych.
                  Reports 23 (1968) 1214.

                  9. Gergen, K.J., The social construction of self-knowledge,
                  in: The Self: Psychological and Philosophical Issues. Ed. T.
                  Mischel. Blackwell, Oxford l977.

                  10. Halperin, K., Snyder, C.R., Shenkel, R.J., and Houston,
                  B.K., Effects of source status and message favorability on
                  acceptance of personality feedback. J. Applied Psych. 61
                  (1976) 85-88.

                  11. Hyman, R., Cold reading: how to convince strangers that
                  you know all about them. Skeptical Inquirer 1(2) (l977)
                  18-37.

                  12. Hyman, R., The psychic reading, in: The Clever Hans
                  Phenomenon, pp. 169-181. Eds., R.A. Sebeok and R. Rosenthal.
                  Academy of Sciences, New York 1981.

                  13. Larsen, W.W., Sr., The Mental Mysteries and Other
                  Writings. Ed. W.W. Larsen, Jr. Genii Publishing, Los Angeles
                  l977.

                  14. Manning, E.J., Personal validation: replication of Forer
                   s study. Psych. Reports 23 (1968) 181-182.

                  15. Marks, D. Investigating the paranormal. Nature 320
                  (1986) 119-124.

                  16. Marks, D. and Kammann, R., The Psychology of the
                  Psychic. Prometheus, Buffalo, 1980.

                  Marks, D. and McKellar, P., (Dr. Marks will supply correct
                  title here) J. Mental Imagery 6 (1982) 1-124.

                  18. Marks, P.A. and Seeman, W., On the Barnum effect. Psych.
                  Record 12 (1962) 203-208.

                  19. Meehl, P.E., Wanted  a good cookbook. Am. Psychologist
                  11 (1956) 262-272.

                  20. Randi, J., Cold reading revisited. Skeptical Inquirer 3
                  (4) (1979) 37-41.

                  21. Rosen, G. Effects of source prestige on subjects
                  acceptance of the Barnum effect: psychologist versus
                  astrologer. J. Consult. Clin. Psych. 43 (1975) 95.

                  22. Silverman, B.I., Studies of astrology. J. Psych. 77
                  (1971) 141-149.

                  23. Snyder, C.R., Acceptance of personality interpretations
                  as a function of assessment procedures. J. Consult. Clin.
                  Psych. 42 (1974) 150.

                  24. Snyder, C.R., Why horoscopes are true: the effect of
                  specificity on acceptance of astrological interpretations.
                  J. Clin. Psych. 30 (1974) 577-580.

                  25. Snyder, C.R. and Larson, G.R., A further look at student
                  acceptance of general personality interpretations. J.
                  Consult. Clin Psych. 38 (1972) 384-388.

                  26. Snyder, C.R., Larsen, D.L, and Bloom, L.J., Acceptance
                  of general personality interpretations prior to and after
                  receipt of diagnostic feedback supposedly based on
                  psychological, graphological, and astrological assessment
                  procedures. J. Clin. Psych. 32 (1976) 258-265.

                  27. Snyder, C.R. and Shenkel, R.J., Effects of favorability,
                  modality, relevance on acceptance of general personality
                  interpretations prior to and after receiving diagnostic
                  feedback. J. Consult. Clin. Psych. 44 (l976) 34-41.

                  28. Snyder, C.R. and Shenkel, R.J., The P.T. Barnum effect.
                  Psych. Today 8(10) (1975) 52-54.

                  29. Tyson, G.A., Why people perceive horoscopes as being
                  true: a review. Bull. Brit. Psych. Soc. 35 (1982) 186-188.

                  30. Ulrich, R.E., Stachnik, T.J., and Stainton, N.R.,
                  Student acceptance of generalized personality
                  interpretations. Psych. Reports 13 (1963) 831-834.

                  31. Weisberg, P., Student acceptance of bogus personality
                  interpretations differing in level of social desirability.
                  Psych. Reports 27 (1970) 743-746.

                                      [i]
  *
