i'm director of engineering at a pretty big web company. i get to see a
lot of resumes. i don't have a lot of time to read all 3+ pages of your
resume. most of the time, i gloss them over looking for keywords, and
that's after some secretary has looked at it and a computer has filtered
it. so here are a few tips to make both of our lives easier.

objectives / personal statements are a waste of space. you're not a
fucking CEO and you have no idea what real objectives are. when writing
about your experience, don't even use complete sentences. "Engineered &
implemented custom CMS. Linux/Apache/MySQL/PHP/Jquery". that's all. i
don't need a paragraph. for every single word on your resume, ask
yourself "does this make the hiring associate like me more?" if not, get
rid of it.

get to your projects quicker and focus on YOUR contributions to each
project. if you did a lot of projects at a single company, list each
project as it's own line, and then list the stack/languages/frameworks
you used. do not say "LAMP" because while I know what LAMP is, there's
always some hiring fucktard who doesn't. if the job listing says LAMP,
say "Linux/Apache/MySQL PHP (LAMP)" at least once. that gets you by
filters. INCLUDE LINKS IF POSSIBLE. if you do backend work, set up a
dummy section on one of your own sites. dummy systems tell me a lot
(that you know how to go out of your way to demonstrate competence).


this is probably one of the most important things on your resume: STATS
GET YOU HIRED... db size, traffic, active user count, bounce rate,
conversions, signup rate, open rate, CPM, CPC, CPA. "Increased
newsletter signup rate from 1% to 1.5% for 100k visit/month site" means
a lot. it doesn't even matter what those numbers are. anyone who does
business instantly knows the value of your work AND that you know what
is important. i'm willing to pay you 20x what i'd pay an asian because
you're supposed to know more than just how to type in some text editor.

if you're a US citizen, say so, especially for entry/junior level jobs
(just put it in the corner "US Citizen"). candidates who are not US
citizens usually need a visa sponsored by the company. in most cases,
that substantially increases the cost to hire and retain the non-citizen
(or at least for companies like ours that actually comply with
immigration laws). that means in many cases, even if you're slightly
shittier than a foreigner, i'll hire you. it's not even salaries. no one
has to pay a fucking lawyer. we don't have risk in the H1-B lottery.
it's just better all around. a lot of the time, i'm stuck guessing by
your name and universities. don't make me guess.
