   Some notes about time:
     * UTC: The time at zero degrees longitude (the Prime Meridian) is
       called Universal Coordinated Time (UTC).
     * GMT: UTC used to be called Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) because the
       Prime Meridian was (arbitrarily) chosen to pass through the Royal
       Observatory in Greenwich.
     * Other timezones can be written as an offset from UTC. Australian
       Eastern Standard Time is UTC+1000. e.g. 10:00 UTC is 20:00 EST on
       the same day.
     * Daylight saving does not affect UTC. It's just a polity deciding to
       change its timezone (offset from UTC). For example, GMT is still
       used: it's the British national timezone in winter. In summer it
       becomes BST.
     * Leap seconds: By international convention, UTC (which is an
       arbitrary human invention) is kept within 0.9 seconds of physical
       reality (UT1, which is a measure of solar time) by introducing a
       "leap second" in the last minute of the UTC year, or in the last
       minute of June.
     * Leap seconds don't have to be announced much more than six months
       before they happen. This is a problem if you need second-accurate
       planning beyond six months.
     * Unix time: Measured as the number of seconds since epoch (the
       beginning of 1970 in UTC). Unix time is not affected by time zones
       or daylight saving.
     * According to POSIX.1, Unix time is supposed to handle a leap second
       by replaying the previous second. e.g.:
59.00
59.25
59.50
59.75
59.00 <- replay
59.25
59.50
59.75
00.00 <- increment
00.25

       This is a trade-off: you can't represent a leap second, and your
       time is guaranteed to go backwards. On the other hand, every day is
       exactly 86,400 seconds long, and you don't need a table of all
       previous and future leap seconds in order to format Unix time as
       human-preferred hours-minutes-seconds.
     * ntpd is supposed to make the replay happen after it sees the "leap
       bits" from upstream timeservers, but I've also seen it do nothing:
       the system goes one second into the future, then slowly slews back
       to the correct time.

   What every programmer should know about time:
     * Timezones are a presentation-layer problem!
       Most of your code shouldn't be dealing with timezones or local
       time, it should be passing Unix time around.
     * When measuring time, measure Unix time. It's UTC. It's easy to
       obtain. It doesn't have timezone offsets or daylight saving (or
       leap seconds).
     * When storing time, store Unix time. It's a single number.
     * If you want to store a humanly-readable time (e.g. logs), consider
       storing it along with Unix time, not instead of Unix time.
     * When displaying time, always include the timezone offset. A time
       format without an offset is useless.
     * The system clock is inaccurate.
     * You're on a network? Every other system's clock is differently
       inaccurate.
     * The system clock can, and will, jump backwards and forwards in time
       due to things outside of your control. Your program should be
       designed to survive this.
     * The number of [clock] seconds per [real] second is both inaccurate
       and variable. It mostly varies with temperature.
     * Don't blindly use gettimeofday(). If you need a monotonic (always
       increasing) clock, have a look at clock_gettime().
     * ntpd can change the system time in two ways:
          + Step: making the clock jump backwards or forwards to the
            correct time instantaneously.
          + Slew: changing the frequency of the clock so that it slowly
            drifts toward the correct time.
       Slew is preferred because it's less disruptive, but it's only
       useful for correcting small offsets.

   Special mentions:
     * Time passes at a rate of one second per second for every observer.
       The frequency of a remote clock relative to an observer is affected
       by velocity and gravity. The clocks inside GPS satellites are
       adjusted for relativistic effects.
     * MySQL (at least 4.x and 5.x) stores DATETIME columns as a
       "YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS" string. I'm not even kidding. If you care at
       all about storing timestamps, store them as integers and use the
       UNIX_TIMESTAMP() and FROM_UNIXTIME() functions.

   Copyright © 2003, 2010, 2011 Emil Mikulic.

References

   1. http://unix4lyfe.org/
