 ci(xyz[Esc] -- This is a weird one. Here, I do not mean insert mode. Instead it
 means inside the parenthesis. So this sequence cuts the text inside parenthesis
 you're standing in and replaces it with "xyz". It also works inside square and
 figure brackets -- just do ci[ or ci{ correspondingly. Naturally, you can do di
 (if you just want to delete all text without typing anything. You can also do a
 instead of i if you want to delete the parentheses as well and not just text
 inside them.


 ci" - cuts the text in current quotes


 ciw - cuts the current word. This works just like the previous one except that
 (is replaced with w).


 C - cut the rest of the line and switch to insert mode.


 ZZ -- save and close current file (WAY faster than Ctrl-F4 to close the
 current tab!)


 ddp - move current line one row down


 xp -- move current character one position to the right


 U - uppercase, so viwU upercases the word


 ~ - switches case, so viw~ will reverse casing of entire word


 Ctrl+u / Ctrl+d scroll the page half-a-screen up or down. This seems to be more
 useful than the usual full-screen paging as it makes it easier to see how the
 two screens relate. For those who still want to scroll entire screen at a time
 there's Ctrl+f for Forward and Ctrl+b for Backward. Ctrl+Y and Ctrl+E scroll
 down or up one line at a time.


 Crazy but very useful command is zz -- it scrolls the screen to make this
 line appear in the middle. This is excellent for putting the piece of code
 you're working on in the center of your attention. Sibling commands -- zt and
 zb -- make this line the top or the bottom one on the sreen which is not
 quite as useful.


 % finds and jumps to the matching parenthesis.


 de -- delete from cursor to the end of the word (you can also do dE to delete
 until the next space)


 bde -- delete the current word, from left to right delimiter


 df[space] -- delete up until and including the next space


 dt. -- delete until next dot


 dd -- delete this entire line


 ye (or yE) -- yanks text from here to the end of the word


 ce - cuts through the end of the word


 bye -- copies current word (makes me wonder what "hi" does!)


 yy -- copies the current line


 cc -- cuts the current line, you can also do S instead. There's also lower cap
 s which cuts current character and switches to insert mode.


 viwy or viwc. Yank or change current word. Hit w multiple times to keep
 selecting each subsequent word, use b to move backwards


 vi{ - select all text in figure brackets. va{ - select all text including {}s


 vi(p - highlight everything inside the ()s and replace with the pasted text


 b and e move the cursor word-by-word, similarly to how Ctrl+Arrows normally
 do. The definition of word is a little different though, as several
 consecutive delmiters are treated as one word. If you start at the middle of a
 word, pressing b will always get you to the beginning of the current word, and
 each consecutive b will jump to the beginning of the next word. Similarly, and
 easy to remember, e gets the cursor to the end of the current, and each
 subsequent, word.


 similar to b/e, capital B and E move the cursor word-by-word using only
 whitespaces as delimiters.


 capital D (take a deep breath) Deletes the rest of the line to the right of the
 cursor, same as Ctrl+Shift+End/Del in normal editors (notice 2 keypresses --
 Shift+D -- instead of 4)
