The New Statesman Special Report - The SAS story they want to suppress

   Published 26 November 2001

   Was the Bravo Two Zero mission in Iraq a shambles? An ex-soldier says
   it was, but Whitehall is determined to gag him, reports Stephen Davis

   The war in Afghanistan is not the only one that now pre-occupies the
   Special Air Service. Seven thousand miles away in New Zealand - at a
   cost of £7m to the British taxpayer - the SAS is engaged in an
   extraordinary series of courtroom battles. The aim is to stop an ex-SAS
   man talking or writing about a mission that is already the most
   publicised undercover military operation of all time. And despite
   repeated defeats in the New Zealand courts, the Ministry of Defence,
   which is financing the cases, shows no sign of giving up.

   What the British government is so anxious to suppress is the true story
   of what happened during Bravo Two Zero, the mission behind Iraqi lines
   during the Gulf war. There have been two best-selling books on the
   subject; the more famous one, by the patrol leader Andy McNab (a
   pseudonym), has sold more than 1.5 million copies and made its author a
   millionaire. McNab portrays the mission as a heroic one. According to
   the ex-SAS man at the centre of the New Zealand court cases, this is
   almost the exact opposite of the truth. In his view, detailed in the
   courts, the operation, in which three SAS men were killed and four
   others captured, was a disaster. Important details in McNab's book,
   including the extent of torture by the Iraqis, were exaggerated, it was
   said in evidence. Worse, the ex-SAS man has damning criticisms of how
   officers treated their men both during and after the mission. Most
   remarkably, he has told the courts that the SAS commanding officer
   during the Gulf war considered court-martialling the survivors.

   The British government's case rests on the unique legal position of SAS
   men. They have all signed lifetime confidentiality agreements that
   override many of their basic rights as UK citizens. In effect, the
   contract prevents them, even after they leave the SAS, from doing what
   army officers have done for centuries - making money from writing their
   memoirs. It also stops them ever revealing details of SAS blunders. If
   they are involved in an operation that ends up as a shambles, they can
   never make the truth known. Still less can they complain if, as
   allegedly happened during Bravo Two Zero, they are abandoned by their
   commanders and left to die when they get into difficulties.

   Andy McNab's book refers to Mark the Kiwi, one of those captured and
   interrogated by the Iraqis. Assuming that this man would be a New
   Zealander, I set out to find him while working on a New Zealand
   television programme about the SAS in 1997. McNab, whom I had met in
   London, proved to be what television people call "good talent" (good at
   telling a story on screen), but he never fulfilled a promise to contact
   Mark the Kiwi on our behalf. On the contrary, what details he gave us
   seemed designed to put us off the scent.

   I eventually tracked down "Mark", known as Mike Coburn (another
   pseudonym), through contacts in the New Zealand branch of the SAS,
   where he had served before going to Britain. I finally met him in the
   Empire Hotel in Auckland in early 1998, where he turned up with his
   wife, a Welsh aerobics instructor. By then, Coburn had left the SAS and
   joined what former regiment members call "the circuit" - the world of
   security and bodyguard work. He worked part of each month at an oil
   installation in north Africa.

   While serving in the unit, he had been ordered to sign one of the new
   confidentiality agreements, introduced long after he had first signed
   up. He was not allowed to study a copy in advance and neither was he
   allowed to keep a copy after signature. Permission to show it to a
   lawyer was firmly denied. Coburn was told that if he refused to sign he
   would be "returned to unit" - meaning he would be transferred out of
   the SAS, losing his status and the special pay that went with it. The
   pay cut would be in the region of 40 per cent - at least £20,000 a
   year.

   I later learnt from MoD sources that the confidentiality agreements had
   been the subject of wider concern in the British forces. Senior NCOs in
   the Special Boat Service, the Royal Marines' equivalent of the SAS, had
   been suspended for a period because they refused to sign the contracts,
   fearing that they were so widely and loosely drawn that they would
   jeopardise future employment prospects. The lieutenant-colonel in
   charge of the SBS then warned the MoD that the dispute could "damage or
   degrade operational capability".

   Coburn signed the contract under protest. Soon afterwards, disgruntled
   by his treatment, he resigned from the regiment. He agreed to appear in
   our TV programme only on the understanding that he would discuss
   matters that were already in the public domain. He refused, for
   example, to discuss any of his service in Northern Ireland, declining
   even to confirm that he had worked there under cover. To this day, he
   has kept those secrets.

   The British government, however, tried to stop the TV programme going
   to air. It hired a large legal team, including New Zealand's most
   expensive QC. It lost in the High Court. It lost in the Court of
   Appeal. It was refused leave to go to the Privy Council. The programme
   went ahead.

   During the programme, stark differences emerged between Coburn's
   account of the Iraqi mission and McNab's. The two men were together
   when they came under fire, and Coburn was hit in the leg and arm. In
   McNab's account: "There was certainly no screaming and no noise coming
   from him. So as far as I was concerned he was dead as soon as they
   opened fire. Thankfully, he's not lying there dying because you know
   you tend to hear that, people will make sure you know that they're
   alive." In Coburn's account: "This huge wave of nausea went over me. I
   mean really intense . . . but there wasn't any pain and another round
   went off through my arm and then the pain sort of came along and I
   started screaming. I was screaming my head off." McNab kept going,
   leaving the New Zealander in the hands of the Iraqis. Later, McNab
   himself was captured.

   Coburn told us that, in his view, McNab had exaggerated the torture he
   suffered. In his book Bravo Two Zero, McNab describes how his tooth was
   pulled out with pliers. By the time he was released, he says, he had
   nerve damage to both hands, a dislocated shoulder, hepatitis and kidney
   and liver damage. But Coburn said that when they were released together
   in Baghdad, he saw no evidence of torture and McNab made no reference
   to it. McNab's teeth, he insisted, were still intact. When we put this
   to McNab, he said: "Well, that's very, very strange . . . the fact is
   that they were smashed in the back and that's why I'm still getting
   them sorted out two weeks ago."

   Coburn went on to accuse the SAS command - including the officer who,
   in his new role as director of UK Special Forces, has tried to stop the
   book being published - of abandoning the men. Coburn said: "You have a
   thing called a guardnet which means you can communicate directly with
   your squadron, and that's a fixed frequency. We managed to get through
   to say that we were in the shit and we needed help. Unfortunately it
   was ignored." The SAS command, it later emerged, had decided that a
   rescue mission was too dangerous. Coburn would have accepted that
   decision if he and his fellow soldiers had not been told in advance
   that help would be sent if they got into trouble. "If they tell you
   that beforehand, then you can get that mindset in your head, and then
   you make your own contingencies for that, but that was certainly never
   made clear to us before we went out. "

   Later, Coburn told a New Zealand court that it was part of the SAS
   ethos that, no matter how much difficulty a patrol got into, the
   regiment would always take urgent steps to get it out, regardless of
   where it was. In the case of Bravo Two Zero, however, it seems that the
   need to send more men and aircraft in search of Iraqi Scud missiles was
   deemed more important than the plight of the patrol.

   Coburn laid the blame for the deaths of his three comrades squarely at
   the door of the SAS regimental hierarchy. Moreover, he said in court
   that, in the post-mission debriefing in Hereford, the commanding
   officer admitted that aspects of the regimental support system had not
   functioned well, and in some cases not at all. "Shocking among his
   revelations to us was the statement that he had decided not to
   court-martial the surviving members of the patrol. The reference to
   court martial was a shock. It seemed incredible after all we had been
   through. There was no justification for even mentioning it and it came
   completely out of the blue . . ." (To this day, Coburn has no idea why
   a court martial should have been mentioned.)

   Coburn also told the court about equipment failures during the mission.
   The risks involved in special forces work was something soldiers
   prepared for, he said, but incompetence, including the regimental
   command's failure to acknowledge its own faults, was something he did
   not expect. "Being told we were expendable after the fact only served
   to compound the betrayal of trust."

   The MoD's failure to prevent the programme going out might have put a
   lesser organisation off. Not Whitehall. Although Coburn's story had
   been made public, the British government now went after his book.
   Representatives of the English publisher, Hodder and Stoughton, were
   called into Whitehall. They had to agree not to publish and had to sign
   a confidentiality contract so that they couldn't even tell the Coburns
   what had happened in the meeting. Reed, the New Zealand publisher, was
   contacted by an English official, with the same result. Moreover, the
   British government's New Zealand lawyers demanded that any money owed
   to Coburn for his work on the book be paid to them. When the Coburns
   hired an English lawyer, he too was called to an MoD meeting and put
   under a confidentiality contract. He still cannot talk to his clients.

   In April 1999, the Coburns packed up and left Britain, moving to New
   Zealand with their three daughters. They hired a local lawyer, Warren
   Templeton, to fight their case on legal aid. Last year, it was back in
   court, at the High Court in Auckland, with two British lawyers (or
   possibly spooks, it was never clear which) in attendance, sitting
   behind four local lawyers hired by the MoD.

   The case proceeded amid extraordinary secrecy - extraordinary for a New
   Zealand court, anyway. The British flew in a string of witnesses -
   known as Soldier A, Soldier B, XY, ST, Staff Assistant and WO Projects
   - who sat behind large screens to protect their identities. The
   witnesses could not be photographed, televised (even using image
   pixellating) or recorded (even using voice-scrambling technology) for
   fear, the government said, that they might be identified and they or
   their families become targets for "sophisticated terrorist attacks".

   The government's case was that it was hardly surprising, given the
   sensitive nature of SAS activities, that "the ethos within UKSF units
   was of complete and lifelong confidentiality . . . indeed, in the words
   of one person, who it is anticipated will give evidence in this case,
   those serving were bound by 'a code of silence'." Publications by SAS
   insiders were a much greater threat to the operations of the special
   forces, and their capacity to undertake operations, than those written
   by "outsiders", the government claimed, adding that "the great majority
   of members of the UKSF adhere to and wish others to adhere to the code
   of silence". It added: "The shadow of doubt that the person serving
   beside one in an operational or covert context may one day aspire to
   join the list of bestsellers does nothing to inspire trust and
   confidence."

   But another theory for the attempted ban was put forward by one of the
   government's own witnesses, who said the contracts had been introduced
   partly to help the SAS "retain market share" after the end of the cold
   war. Soldier ST, a former warrant officer, told Justice Salmon that the
   regiment was concerned about competition from the Paratroops and the
   Royal Marines. The soldier agreed with Coburn's lawyer, Warren
   Templeton, that enforcing the contract was intended to "safeguard
   employability", see off competition from other units within Britain and
   "protect your market base". Justice Salmon asked: "You are really
   saying that secrecy protects your position in the market?" Soldier ST
   replied: "That is a good way of summing it up." He also agreed with
   Templeton that the SAS was "trying to develop its future role now that
   the cold war has dispersed".

   Soldier ST, who was responsible for assessing damage to the regiment
   from various publications, agreed that much of what was in Coburn's
   manuscript was already in the public domain.

   The trial verdict was another major defeat for the MoD and the
   regiment. Justice Salmon agreed that a few minor passages in the book,
   which contained confidential information apparently about MoD
   equipment, would have to be amended. But he said it was unlawful for
   the ministry to order Coburn, in effect, to give up his civil rights.
   "The Ministry of Defence has used its power to issue orders for the
   improper purpose of restricting the defendant's right to freedom of
   speech and expression." When he signed the contract, the judge said,
   Coburn had been under economic pressure which was "illegitimate and so
   constituted duress". It was not at all the same thing as ordering a
   soldier to "take that hill". It damaged a man's private law rights.
   Costs were awarded to Coburn's side.

   This was the British government's third defeat in the New Zealand
   courts. But the MoD promptly appealed. A further three-day hearing has
   been held in the Court of Appeal in Wellington and a decision is
   expected soon. But even if it loses again, and legal scholars are
   betting it will, the government has said it will appeal again -
   presumably to the law lords in the Privy Council in London. By that
   stage, the MoD's bill is likely to top £10m.

   One of the ironies of the battle is that, while everything Coburn wants
   to publish has already been made public one way or another, he knows
   secrets that the British government has reason to dread ever being
   revealed.

   He worked on a tour of what is known as "special duties" in Northern
   Ireland on operations against the IRA. SAS men were sometimes
   transferred into the still-secret 14 Intelligence Company, whose
   operations are shrouded in mystery. A former IRA man once told me that
   14 Company was feared by the Provisional IRA. Coburn will say only: "My
   time in Northern Ireland was really very, very enjoyable, very, very
   good work, all under operational conditions and it's something I'm
   quite proud of."

   Stephen Davis is editor of the New Zealand Herald. He can be contacted
   at theeditor@xtra.co.nz
   [40]Get the full magazine for just £1 a week with a trial subscription.
   PLUS get a free copy of Extreme Rambling: Walking Israel's Separation
   Barrier. For Fun. by Mark Thomas.
